---
title: "Within-patient evolution of plasmid-mediated antimicrobial resistance"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/JDF_2022
date: 2022-10-27
excerpt: '*Awarded with the José Casadesús* 2024 Prize by the Spanish Society for Microbiology*'
venue: 'Nature Ecology & Evolution'
paperurl: 'http://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01908-7'
---

***DelaFuente J.*** (co-corresponding author), Toribio-Celestino L., Santos-Lopez A., León-Sampedro R., Alonso-del Valle A., Costas C., Hernández-García M., Lun Cui, Rodríguez-Beltrán J., Bikard D., Cantón R. & Alvaro San Millan (co-corresponding author)

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in bacteria is a major threat to public health; one of the key elements in the spread and evolution of AMR in clinical pathogens is the transfer of conjugative plasmids. The drivers of AMR evolution have been studied extensively in vitro but the evolution of plasmid-mediated AMR in vivo remains poorly explored. Here, we tracked the evolution of the clinically relevant plasmid pOXA-48, which confers resistance to the last-resort antibiotics carbapenems, in a large collection of enterobacterial clones isolated from the gut of hospitalized patients. Combining genomic and experimental approaches, we first characterized plasmid diversity and the genotypic and phenotypic effects of multiple plasmid mutations on a common genetic background. Second, using cutting-edge genomic editing in wild-type multidrug-resistant enterobacteria, we dissected three cases of within-patient plasmid-mediated AMR evolution. Our results revealed compensatory evolution of plasmid-associated fitness cost and the evolution of enhanced plasmid-mediated AMR in bacteria evolving in the gut of hospitalized patients. Crucially, we observed that the evolution of pOXA-48-mediated AMR in vivo involves a pivotal trade-off between resistance levels and bacterial fitness. This study highlights the need to develop new evolution-informed approaches to tackle plasmid-mediated AMR dissemination.
